Tutorial: Adding end-to-end custom navigation capabilities to Nav2 (#903)
ros-planning/navigation.ros.org: plugin_tutorials/docs/writing_new_nav2_full_pipeline.rst

.. _writing_new_nav2_full_pipeline:

Writing a Full Pipeline For New Functionality in Nav2
*****************************************************

.. image:: images/Writing_new_nav2_full_pipeline/demo.gif
   :width: 100%

- `Overview`_
- `Requirements`_
- `Package Structure`_
- `Step 1 - Define Action Messages`_
- `Step 2 - Implement Dedicated Action Servers`_
- `Step 3 - Implement Behavior Tree Nodes`_
- `Step 4 - Implement the Navigator Plugin`_
- `Step 5 - Write Behavior Tree XML`_
- `Step 6 - Configure Parameters and Launch`_
- `Step 7 - Build and Run`_

Overview
========

.. note::

   Source code can be `found here <https://github.com/NOTMOVETON/NAV2Tutorial>`_.

This tutorial shows how to integrate a custom server to do a task-specific action as part of navigation using the Nav2 framework. This could be anything from a custom VLM integration, application-specific algorithm, or even a task to complete along the mission. This shows, for example, how to put together a navigation system following a precomputed path while performing hardware operations to engage a mowing blade and rotate a camera for a lawn mowing example.

> This tutorial shows how to wire together custom hardware-operation servers, Behavior Tree (BT) action nodes, and a ``BehaviorTreeNavigator`` plugin so that a robot can execute hardware commands (e.g. engage a mowing blade, rotate a camera) as part of autonomous navigation with Nav2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to wire together custom hardware-operation task servers, Behavior Tree (BT) action nodes, and a ``BehaviorTreeNavigator`` plugin so that a robot can execute hardware commands corresponding to the specific navigation style the application requires (e.g. engage a mowing blade, rotate a camera) as part of autonomous navigation with Nav2. This demonstrates that you do not need to simply navigate to pose, but can create autonomous navigation capabilities within Nav2 completing customized navigation APIs.
```

The example implements a lawnmower robot with two operations:

- **BladeServer** — enables or disables the cutting blade.
- **CameraServer** — rotates an onboard camera to a target yaw.

> The key insight is the **layered integration pattern**: a dedicated ROS 2 action server owns each hardware operation, a BT node wraps an action client that calls this server as a tree primitive, and the navigator plugin composes those primitives into a mission via a BT XML file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key insight is the **layered integration pattern**: a dedicated ROS 2 action server owns each hardware operation, a BT node wraps an action client that calls this server as a tree primitive, and the navigator plugin composes those primitives into a navigation mission with the task-specific inputs and outputs via a BT XML file.
```

For a better understanding, here is the image of the pipeline flow:

.. image:: images/Writing_new_nav2_full_pipeline/image4.png

Data Flow Explanation
---------------------

Here is how a navigation request travels through the stack end-to-end:

> 1. **Client → Navigator plugin**: The ``bt_navigator`` node loads and manages navigator plugins via pluginlib. Each plugin registers its own ROS 2 action server during activation. A client sends a goal directly to that action server (e.g. ``navigate_with_operations``). The goal has all fields already formed — how that is done is covered in Step 7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Client → Navigator plugin**: The ``bt_navigator`` node loads and manages navigator plugins via pluginlib. Each plugin registers its own ROS 2 action server during activation. A client (i.e. your application) sends a goal to that action server (e.g. ``navigate_with_operations``) to navigate using a customizable API.
```

> 2. **Navigator plugin → Behavior Tree**: The plugin's ``goalReceived()`` loads the BT XML file specified in the goal (or the default tree if none is provided) and writes all required variables onto the blackboard — in this demo that is only the path (``nav_msgs/Path``). The BT executor then begins ticking the tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Navigator plugin → Behavior Tree**: The plugin's ``goalReceived()`` loads the BT XML file specified in the goal and writes all required variables onto the blackboard from the action request — in this demo that is the precomputed path (``nav_msgs/Path``). The BT executor then executes on the behavior tree.
```

> 3. **Behavior Tree → BT nodes**: The tree on the diagram sequences three BT action nodes (``SetBladeState``, ``FollowPath``, ``SetCameraYaw``). Each node is a thin wrapper around a ROS 2 action client; it reads its inputs from blackboard ports, sends the action goal, and maps the server response back to a ``BT::NodeStatus``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Behavior Tree → BT nodes**: The tree executes the navigation behavior, each BT node is a thin wrapper around a ROS 2 action client. They read inputs from blackboard ports, sends the action goal, and maps the server response back to its output ports.
```

> 4. **BT nodes → Task servers**: Each action client calls a dedicated ROS 2 action server that owns one operation (``blade_server``, ``controller_server``, ``camera_server``). The server executes the hardware command and streams feedback or returns a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **BT nodes → Task servers**: Each BT ndoe action client calls a dedicated ROS 2 action server that owns one task or operation (``blade_server``, ``controller_server``, ``camera_server``).
```

Author: typo here 
Each BT ndoe -> Each BT node

Author: fixed

> 5. **Task servers → Hardware**: Each server owns a hardware abstraction layer — it publishes commands to ROS 2 topics that physical hardware drivers or simulation nodes subscribe to. For example, ``blade_server`` publishes ``std_msgs/Bool`` to ``/lawnmower/blade_command``; ``camera_server`` drives rotation and publishes the current yaw as ``std_msgs/Float32``. The hardware driver (or simulator) subscribes to these topics and actuates the physical device. The rest of the stack never touches hardware directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Task servers → Task**: Each server owns a core capability like computing a path or performing an operation with hardware. It returns the derived result to be used by other behavior tree nodes to compose the complete navigation behavior.
```

For another real-world example of this pattern see `opennav_coverage <https://github.com/open-navigation/opennav_coverage>`_ — a coverage planning navigator uses the same approach.

.. note::

>    Both operation servers can alternatively be implemented as Nav2 *behavior plugins* loaded by the ``behavior_server``, which avoids writing a separate lifecycle node. But this tutorial deliberately uses standalone action servers to illustrate the full integration path: how to write a Nav2-compatible server from scratch, give it lifecycle management, and expose it to the BT executor as a first-class node type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Both operation servers can alternatively be implemented as Nav2 *behavior plugins* loaded by the ``behavior_server``, which avoids writing a separate lifecycle node. But this tutorial deliberately uses standalone action servers to illustrate the full integration path: how to write a Nav2-compatible server from scratch, expose it to the BT, and creating a BT  Navigator to leverage them as a first-class node type.
```

Requirements
============

- ROS 2 (Jazzy or later)
- Nav2 (binary or source)
- Docker

Package Structure
=================

> The tutorial spans five packages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tutorial spans five packages, which you can find at XYZ:
```

And put in the URL :-)

Author: tutorial already have link on line 25, but ok

Author: done

+=======================================+======================================================+
| ``nav2_operations_msgs``              | Action message definitions                           |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| ``nav2_operations_servers``           | BladeServer and CameraServer lifecycle nodes         |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| ``nav2_operations_bt_nodes``          | ``SetBladeState`` and ``SetCameraYaw`` BT nodes      |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| ``nav2_operations_navigator``         | ``NavigateWithOperations`` navigator plugin          |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| ``nav2_operations_bringup``           | Launch files, params, and BT XML trees               |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+

Step 1 - Define Action Messages
================================

> Each operation gets its own action file with a goal, result, and feedback section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each task server or operation gets its own action file with a goal, result, and feedback section. We also define a navigation action to be used by the BT Navigator plugin to define the I/O for the customized lawn mower navigation task using the task servers and precomputed path.
```

Create three action definitions in ``nav2_operations_msgs/action/``.

**BladeCommand.action** — binary blade toggle:

.. code-block:: text

   bool enable
   ---
   bool success
   ---
   # no feedback

**CameraCommand.action** — rotate camera to a yaw setpoint with streaming feedback:

.. code-block:: text

   float32 target_yaw
   ---
   bool success
   ---
   float32 current_yaw

**NavigateWithOperations.action** — custom navigator interface:

.. code-block:: text

   string behavior_tree
   nav_msgs/Path path
   ---
   uint16 error_code
   ---
   # no feedback

> For more details refer to the ``nav2_operations_msgs`` package in the tutorial code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details refer to the ``nav2_operations_msgs`` package in the tutorial code. You can find more examples of this in ``nav2_msgs`` for ``NavigateToPose``, ``NavigateThroughPoses`` navigator APIs as well as other task servers like ``FollowPath`` and ``ComputePathToPose``.
```

Step 2 - Implement Dedicated Action Servers
============================================

> Each server is a ``nav2_util::LifecycleNode`` that wraps a ``nav2_util::SimpleActionServer``. Using ``LifecycleNode`` is what allows the ``nav2_lifecycle_manager`` to bring the servers up and down in the correct order alongside the rest of the Nav2 stack. ``SimpleActionServer`` handles goal queuing, preemption, and cancellation boilerplate so the execute callback only contains hardware logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each server is a ``nav2::LifecycleNode`` that wraps a ``nav2::SimpleActionServer``. Using ``LifecycleNode`` is what allows the ``nav2_lifecycle_manager`` to bring the servers up and down in the correct order alongside the rest of the Nav2 stack. ``SimpleActionServer`` handles goal queuing, preemption, and cancellation logic so the execute callback only contains task specific logic rather than ROS 2 actions boilerplate.
```

.. code-block:: cpp

   BladeServer::CallbackReturn
   BladeServer::on_activate(const rclcpp_lifecycle::State & /*state*/)
   {
     blade_pub_->on_activate();
     action_server_->activate();
     createBond();  // bond lets lifecycle_manager detect if this node crashes
     return CallbackReturn::SUCCESS;
   }

**on_deactivate** — reverses activation in the opposite order: server first (stop accepting goals), then publisher, then destroy the bond.

.. code-block:: cpp

   BladeServer::CallbackReturn
   BladeServer::on_deactivate(const rclcpp_lifecycle::State & /*state*/)
   {
     action_server_->deactivate();
     blade_pub_->on_deactivate();
     destroyBond();
     return CallbackReturn::SUCCESS;
   }

**on_cleanup** — releases all resources so the node returns to a clean state and could be reconfigured.

.. code-block:: cpp

   BladeServer::CallbackReturn
   BladeServer::on_cleanup(const rclcpp_lifecycle::State & /*state*/)
   {
     action_server_.reset();
     blade_pub_.reset();
     return CallbackReturn::SUCCESS;
   }

> Execute handler:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute handler to complete some kind of task:
```

------------

The camera server simulates incremental rotation at ``max_rotation_speed`` deg/s in a 20 Hz loop, publishing feedback on each tick.

Key constructor parameters:

.. code-block:: cpp

   declare_parameter("max_rotation_speed", 45.0);
   declare_parameter("tolerance", 0.5);
   declare_parameter("camera_mount_offset", 0.0);
   declare_parameter("action_server_result_timeout", 10.0);

Lifecycle transitions:

+--------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| **Callback**       | **Action**                                   |
+====================+==============================================+
| ``on_configure``   | Create publisher and action server           |
+--------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``on_activate``    | Activate publisher, start server, bond       |
+--------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``on_deactivate``  | Deactivate server and publisher, destroy bond|
+--------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``on_cleanup``     | Reset all members                            |
+--------------------+----------------------------------------------+

> ``CameraServer`` follows the same lifecycle pattern as ``BladeServer`` above — ``on_configure`` reads parameters and creates the publisher and action server, ``on_activate`` activates them and bonds to the lifecycle manager, ``on_deactivate`` reverses that, and ``on_cleanup`` resets all members. The full implementation is in ``workspace/nav2_operations_servers/src/camera_server.cpp``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``CameraServer`` follows the same lifecycle pattern as ``BladeServer`` above — ``on_configure`` reads parameters and creates the publisher and action server, ``on_activate`` activates them and bonds to the lifecycle manager, ``on_deactivate`` reverses that, and ``on_cleanup`` resets all members. The full implementation is in ``nav2_operations_servers/src/camera_server.cpp``.
```

The execute loop checks for cancellation, steps ``current_yaw_`` toward ``target_yaw``, publishes the intermediate yaw, and exits when within ``tolerance_``:

.. code-block:: cpp

   while (rclcpp::ok()) {
     if (action_server_->is_cancel_requested()) {
       result->success = false;
       action_server_->terminate_current(result);
       return;
     }
     float diff = target_yaw - current_yaw_;
     if (std::abs(diff) <= static_cast<float>(tolerance_)) { break; }
     current_yaw_ += (diff > 0 ? 1.0f : -1.0f) * std::min(step, std::abs(diff));
     // publish and feedback ...
     loop_rate.sleep();
   }

For more details refer to the ``nav2_operations_servers`` package in the tutorial code.

Step 3 - Implement Behavior Tree Nodes
=======================================

> Each BT node inherits from ``nav2_behavior_tree::BtActionNode<ActionT>`` and is compiled as a shared library loaded by the BT executor at runtime. ``BtActionNode`` handles the full ROS 2 action lifecycle — sending the goal, waiting for acceptance, streaming feedback, and mapping the result to a ``BT::NodeStatus``. The subclass only needs to override ``on_tick()`` to populate the goal from the BT blackboard/ports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each BT node inherits from ``nav2_behavior_tree::BtActionNode<ActionT>`` and is a BehaviorTree.CPP library plugin that is loaded by the BT Navigator at runtime when loading the BT XML file. ``BtActionNode`` handles the full ROS 2 action lifecycle — sending the goal, waiting for acceptance, streaming feedback, and mapping the result to a ``BT::NodeStatus``. The subclass only needs to override ``on_tick()`` to populate the goal from the BT blackboard/ports, and ``on_XYZ()`` for handling terminal states like cancellation, preemption, or successful completion to populate the response ports.
```
